Paper: Scikit-HEP (#726)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/henry_schreiner/henry_schreiner.rst

:author: Henry Schreiner
:email: henryfs@princeton.edu
:institution: Princeton University

:author: Jim Pivarski
:email: pivarski@princeton.edu
:institution: Princeton University

:author: Eduardo Rodrigues
:email: eduardo.rodrigues@cern.ch
:institution: University of Liverpool

:bibliography: mybib

--------------------------------------
Awkward Packaging: building Scikit-HEP
--------------------------------------

.. class:: abstract

   Scikit-HEP has grown rapidly over the last few years, not just to serve the
   needs of the High Energy Physics (HEP) community, but in many ways, the
   Python ecosystem at large. AwkwardArray, boost-histogram/hist, and iminuit
   are examples of libraries that are used beyond the original HEP focus. In

>    this talk, we will look key packages in the ecosystem, at how the collection

Reviewer: In this paper?

Reviewer 2: This is the abstract of the presentation, hence "this talk". If that's accepted we should then replace with "In these proceedings".

Author: I'm trying "in these proceedings" here.

   of 30+ packages was developed and maintained, and the software ecosystem
   contributions made to packages like cibuildwheel, pybind11, nox,
   scikit-build, build, and pipx that support this effort, and the Scikit-HEP
   developer pages, and initial WebAssembly support.

.. class:: keywords

>    packaging, ecosystem, high energy physics

Reviewer 2: I would add "community project" as that is key to us.

Author: This was copied from the submission, not sure if it needs to match.

Reviewer 2: I would imagine we can update keywords, but OK also if you want to play it the safest.

Author: Updated it unless others disagree.

Introduction
------------

..
   High Energy Physics needs. Info about dataset size, etc. Historical ROOT info.

High Energy Physics (HEP) has always had intense computing needs. The World

> Wide Web was invented at CERN in 1989 :cite:`leiner2009brief`. Today, we have

Reviewer: I'm not understanding the link between intense compute and WWW

Author: Filled this out a bit, could you see if it helps?

> the largest machine in the world at CERN, the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), 27

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the largest machine in the world, at CERN, the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), 27
```

Author: ```suggestion
the largest machine in the world at CERN: the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), 27
```

Reviewer 2: Fine with me :).

> the largest machine in the world at CERN: the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), 27

Reviewer: I'm also not understanding the link between a large apparatus and intense compute. In general, this paragraph reads like a collection of disparate statements -- maybe more exposition is required? Or maybe this paragraph isn't needed?

Author: Filled out a bit.

km in circumference :cite:`evans2008lhc`. We have one of the largest scientific

> dataset in the world of exabyte scale :cite:`peters2011exabyte`.

Reviewer: Largest compared to what? Some other examples might help readers put this into context.

Author: Added a bit here + a reference.

> HEP scientists have been interested in Python since 1993

Reviewer: I took a quick look at this reference -- it looks like it was a scientist, singular, in 1993? The paper itself seems to mark 2000 or 2001 as the point when other HEP scientists started using it?

Author: He names at least two people using Python in HEP before he did.

Reviewer 2: The author of the paper was a colleague of Guido in Amsterdam and was one of the first guinea pigs, hence his article.

To avoid any "worries" we could rephrase "HEP scientists have been interested in Python since 1993" as "HEP scientists started exploring Python circa 1993". Is that OK to both of you, in which case I assume Henry will commit the change?

Reviewer 3: The claim about HEP getting interested in Python around 2000 can also be justified by a plot, but maybe we're getting plot-heavy. (Is there a page limit?)

The following plot counts mentions of various languages in Computing in High Energy and nuclear Physics ([CHEP](https://www.jlab.org/conference/CHEP2023)) titles and abstracts, the primary conference for computing in HEP, which goes back to 1985.

[![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1852447/176929206-983297df-0bfc-4daf-8cdf-7ff9d118c4b5.png)](https://github.com/jpivarski-talks/2022-05-23-analysis-ux-python-hep/blob/main/PLOTS/chep-papers-language-2.pdf)

The big transition from Fortran to C++ in the late 90's is well-known, as was the major adoption of ROOT around 2003 (displacing alternatives that had been floating in the 90's). What isn't as well-known is that mentions of Python have been increasing linearly since then, at first for controlling C++ codebases, but from about 2017 onward, for analysis, too. The convergence on Python for scripting (as opposed to Tcl, Perl, etc.) was noticed and commented upon at the time, such as the slide above, summarizing the 2000 conference. (To say that "ROOT is the exception of the Python rule" was premature, as PyROOT started in 2004.)

But this might be too much emphasis on pre-history. I think we're justified in saying that physicists were interested and using Python from about 2000 onward, though only very recently (~2017) for data analysis.

Author: ROOTPy was focused almost entirely on analysis, and in use ending around 2016. I used to use it in those years. I think the PyROOT helpers, ROOTPy/root-numpy/root-pandas and such were in use for those years. ROOTless (or at least less ROOT) analysis are what really took off around 2016/2017.

Reviewer: > I think we're justified in saying that physicists were interested and using Python from about 2000 onward, though only very recently (~2017) for data analysis.

Do we want to update the paper to say this instead?

Author: Tried reworking it again. The point of this paragraph is that ROOT was chosen over Python in 1995, which is not related to the growth of Python in the 2000's. Later that plot is included and there's a discussion of the adoption in the 20xx's.

:cite:`templon_jeffrey_2022_6353621`. With the release of Python 1.0.0 in 1994,

> physicists started writing code in Python. It was not able to provide the

Reviewer: A physicist?

> performance required to become the main language for HEP.  In 1995, the ROOT

Reviewer: Like the previous paragraph, this reads less like a story or an argument, and more like a collection of disjointed statements. Who discovered that Python wasn't performant enough? What was the root of the problem? How did this lead to the development of root? If it's not worth writing this as an exposition, it probably isn't needed for the paper.

Author: I've reworked this a bit.

> project was released, making C++ the main language for HEP.  The ROOT project

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
project was released, making C++ the main language for HEP.  The ROOT project for an analysis toolkit (and framework)
```

> project was released, making C++ the main language for HEP.  The ROOT project

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
project for an analysis toolkit (and framework) was released, making C++ the main language for HEP.  The ROOT project
```

> also needed an "extension" languages; this is the language driving the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
also needed an "extension language" - this is the language driving the
```

> also needed an "extension language" - this is the language driving the

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand the distinction you are making between a language and an extension language.

Author: I've avoided that term.

> analysis. Python was rejected for this role due to being "exotic", and because

Reviewer: Can I have a reference for who called Python "exotic"?

> it was considered too much to ask Physicists to code in two language. Instead,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it was considered too much to ask Physicists to code in two languages. Instead,
```

ROOT provided a C++ interpreter, called CINT, which later was replaced with
Cling, which is the basis for the clang-repl project in LLVM today :cite:`ifrim2022gpu`.

> Python would start showing up a few years later in experiment frameworks as a

Reviewer: "a few years later" could be taken to mean 1997. Is this what you mean?

configuration language. These frameworks were primarily written in C++, but

> were made of many configurable parts; the glueing together of the system was

Reviewer: Is this your personal experience of doing physics in the 90s?

Author: Added a citation. Though this is how many frameworks still work (LHCb, CMS, and Atlas all work this way today), and that's from personal experience (at least for LHCb and CMS).

done in Python - a model still popular today, though some experiments are now

> using Python + Numba model instead, like Xenon1T :cite:`remenska2017giving,rousselle2021fast`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using Python + Numba as an alternative, enhanced, model, like Xenon1T :cite:`remenska2017giving,rousselle2021fast`.
```

In the early 2000s, the use of Python HEP exploded, heavily driven by
experiments like LHCb at CERN developing frameworks and user tools for
scripting. ROOT started providing Python bindings in 2004

> :cite:`generowicz2004reflection` that were not considered Pythonic, and still

Reviewer: I'm not seeing in this reference where the authors call ROOT's python library not pythonic.

Author: I think I missed it. It's a paper that explicitly calls the rewrite "more Pythonic", so the inverse can be applied (the original was not very Pythonic). Added.

required a complex multi-hour build of ROOT to use [#]_. Analyses

> still consisted largely of ROOT, with Python sometimes showing up.

Reviewer: Am I understanding correctly that the paper this far is a summary of the contents in https://zenodo.org/record/6353621?

Author: Not entirely, but partially. I was hoping @jpivarski might have had some input on this part, as he has given nice summaries of this period before.

> .. [#] Almost 20 years later ROOT's Python bindigns have been rewritten for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. [#] Almost 20 years later ROOT's Python bindings have been rewritten for
```

>    easier Pythonizations, and installing ROOT in Conda is now much easier,

Reviewer: Is Pythonizations a word?

Reviewer 2: A quick search online shows that very many people use the "word". It's not a word in the strict sense, yes, but is that a problem for SciPy proceedings, which tend to be technical anyway, with slang and where neologisms seem appropriate? If the "word" really sound unacceptable to you we could replace with "Python-ize", I guess.

Author: It's used in https://www.epj-conferences.org/articles/epjconf/abs/2020/21/epjconf_chep2020_06004/epjconf_chep2020_06004.html (which is now cited above)

>    thanks in large part to efforts from Scikit-HEP developers.

Reviewer: Is this you?

Reviewer 2: Us and other co-organisation developers.

Author: Mostly Chris Burr, also from Scikit-HEP, along with me and some help from the ROOT team.

> By the mid 2010's, a marked change had occurred. Many students were coming in

Reviewer: What caused this change?

Author: Isn't this the next sentence? The change was students were coming in with Python knowledge.

Reviewer: Yup I'm asking why

Author: Oh, okay.

Author: Expanded a bit.

with little or no C++ experience, but had existing knowledge of Python and the

> growing Python data science ecosystem, like NumPy and Pandas. Several analyses

Reviewer: Several analyses like what?

Reviewer 2: This refers to physics analyses done within the particle physics collaborations. We can expand as per my reply.

Reviewer 2: I made a suggested clarification. Kindly resolve if happy, @deniederhut.

> were made driven by Python, with ROOT only being used for things that were not

Reviewer: "made driven"?

Author: made -> performed makes this read better.

> available in the Python ecosystem. Some of these were HEP specific: ROOT was

Reviewer: Generally speaking, dependent clauses should be related to and provide further information about the independent clause to which they are attached. "users needed to be able to read data files" is not "HEP specific".

Author: I guess I should repeat "ROOT"? Users need to read ROOT files.

Reviewer 2: Fair point, Henry. Yes.

also a data format, so users needed to be able to read data files. Others were
less specific: HEP users have intense histogram requirements due to the data
sizes, large portions of HEP data is "jagged" rather than rectangular, vectors
manipulation was important (especially Lorenz Vectors, a four dimensional
relativistic vector with a non-Euclidean metric), and data fitting was
important, especially with complex models and excellent error estimation.

.. figure:: shells-hep.pdf

>    The Scikit-HEP ecosystem and affilated packages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The Scikit-HEP ecosystem and affiliated packages.
```

   :label:`fig-shells`

Beginnings of a scikit
----------------------

..
   About how it was planned and built.

> In 2016, the ecosystem for Python in HEP was rather fragmented. There were

Reviewer: Do we mean fragmented? Or do we mean uncoordinated?

Reviewer 2: Well, both. But IMO it is not a good idea to add "uncoordinated" because nobody really can have a coordination role. What happens with projects such as ours - Scikit-HEP - is that we effectively push more in some directions rather than others. That's been working really well because things are community-driven and community oriented, with discussions on designs and interests being in the open.

Reviewer 3: I think the word "fragmented" applies. The situation was that physicists were developing tools in isolation, without knowing out the overlaps with other tools, and without making them interoperable. There is a kind of cohesion that can happen without centralized management—which describes the situation now and not the situation in 2016.

Reviewer: > without knowing out the overlaps with other tools, and without making them interoperable

Cool, could we say this explicitly?

> several rather popular packages that were useful in HEP spread around among

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a handful of popular packages that were useful in HEP spread around among
```

> a handful of popular packages that were useful in HEP spread around among

Reviewer: Why was this a problem or challenge?

Author: This is describing the current successful packages more than the failures (most of the packages mentioned here will go on to join Scikit-HEP). I'll try to clarify that the problem was authors were leaving and there was no continued or shared maintenance.

> different authors. ROOTPy had several packages that made the ROOT-Python bridge

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
different authors. The rootpy project had several packages that made the ROOT-Python bridge
```

> a little easier, such as ``root-numpy`` and ``root-pandas`` packages. The

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a little easier, such as the ``root-numpy`` and related ``root-pandas`` packages. The
```

> MINUIT fitting library was integrated into ROOT, but the ``iminuit`` package :cite:`iminuit`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
C++ MINUIT fitting library was integrated into ROOT, but the ``iminuit`` package :cite:`iminuit`
```

Reviewer 2: Add the usual reference to MINUIT, see the paper at https://github.com/scikit-hep/iminuit/blob/develop/CITATION.rst? Seems best.

> C++ MINUIT fitting library was integrated into ROOT, but the ``iminuit`` package :cite:`iminuit`

Reviewer: I am guessing the intention behind sharing this example is that there were two separate efforts to make MINUIT available in Python? Do we want to say more about that?

provided a standalone Python package with an extracted copy of MINUIT. Several
other specialized standalone C++ packages had bindings as well.

> Eduardo Rodrigues, a scientist working in the LHCb project at CERN for the

Reviewer: Did we define what LHCb is?

Reviewer 2: We can easily refer to the LHCb experiment website - better use the public one https://lhcb-outreach.web.cern.ch/. In the first instance we can add a few word of the kind "the LHCb particle physics experiment at the CERN laboratory".

@henryiii, do you want me to make some edits or else I keep suggesting and you commit them all yourself?

Author: I've done a first round, would you like to do a second follow-up?

University of Cincinnati, started working on a package called ``scikit-hep``

> that would provide a set to tools useful for physicists working on an analysis.

Reviewer: "analysis" is pretty generic -- presumably scikit-hep does something more specific?

Author: Not really. It was basically "SciPy for HEP", a grab bag of things needed for someone working on analysis (next line).

The initial version of the ``scikit-hep`` package had a simple vector library,

> unit conversions, several useful statistical tools, and province recording

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
unit conversions, several useful statistical tools, and provenance recording
```

> unit conversions, several useful statistical tools, and provenance recording

Reviewer: What kinds of statistical tools? Why was this not "transformational"?

Author: I'm going to drop the line after the -, I don't like it, sounds opinionated and doesn't really add anything. (I think uproot was where we started becoming "transformational", that is, having a major impact on analyses)

functionality - interesting, but not yet transformational for most analyses.

He also placed the GitHub repository into a GitHub organization of the same
name, and asked several of the other HEP related packages to join. The ROOTPy
project was ending, with the primary author moving on, and so several of the

> then-popular packages that were included in the ROOTPy org were happily

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
then-popular packages that were included in the rootpy organization were happily
```

> project was ending, with the primary author moving on, and so several of the

Reviewer: Did rootpy end? Or was management of it transferred?

Author: The package "rootpy" did end, it was not transferred. Much of what it developed (and the other two package that did get transferred, root-numpy and root-pandas) inspired the new "pythonic" PyROOT bindings (now referenced earlier), or our tools (mplhep).

Reviewer 2: @henryiii, we should either call ROOTPy or rootpy as the project. The former version is better and there are a couple of places to make uniform.

Author: Used ROOTPy. Should all package names be `fenced` or all be unfenced? I was sort-of fencing the first usage of a package name. I'll probably add pre-commit file just for my use to enforce a few conventions. ;)

Author: Went with all plain. Though I wrote a little pre-commit utility to check for doing it the other way.

> then-popular packages that were included in the rootpy organization were happily

Reviewer: Not popular anymore?

Author: Added a footnote (for this and the above).

> transferred to Scikit-HEP. Several other existing HEP libraries, primarily

Reviewer: Several others like what?

Author: Added some.

interfacing to existing C++ simulation and tracking frameworks, also joined.

First initial success
---------------------

In 2016, the largest barrier to using Python in HEP in a Pythonic way was

> ROOT. It was a challenging compile, a huge "library", not very Pythonic,

Reviewer: Challenging "to" compile? Why is library in quotations?

Reviewer: Oh also, we've called it not Pythonic twice now and haven't really said why or on whose authority?

Author: The reference now linked the first time. :) And a simple snippet, of say writing a file, would be enough to convince anyone it's not like any Python seen elsewhere!

Author: I think it sort of works the first way, but I can say it that way too. I've reworking the reasons a bit here.

> and didn't play well with packaging. Many analyses started with a "convert data"

Reviewer: Do you mean that many ROOT analyses start by converting data? And this made it a barrier to using Python in HEP?

Author: Python analyses, but they had to read ROOT files since all the experiment data is in ROOT.

(if it's not clear, when I respond like this, I'm also editing the paper with something similar).

step and worked with a Python friendly format like HDF5.

This changed when Jim Pivarski introduced Uproot (originally envisioned as
"µroot"). This was a pure-Python implementation of a ROOT file reader (and

> later writer) that could remove the initial conversions step by simply

Reviewer: I'm guessing you mean that you could remove the initial conversion step by simply using uroot, and, separately, that it was simple to install?

Author: Clarified partial from above, and also touched up here too - step was the wrong word, should have been environment.

pip installing a package. It also had a simple, Pythonic interface and produced

> "nice" outputs, like NumPy arrays.

Reviewer: Why is nice in quotation marks?

Author: Reworded.

> Uproot was not just a file format reader; it quickly split into three packages.

Reviewer: If it isn't just a file reader, why did you say so in the opening sentence of the last paragraph?

Author: Reworded this part.

> Uproot was not just a file format reader; it quickly split into three packages.

Reviewer: You say here that uproot split into three packages, but I think you only go on to name two of them?

Author: The other is uproot. I reworded it to clarify that it produced two related packages.

One, uproot-methods, included Pythonic access to functionality provided by ROOT

> for it's classes, like vectors. The other was AwkwardArray, which would grow to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for its classes, like vectors. The other was AwkwardArray, which would grow to
```

> for its classes, like vectors. The other was AwkwardArray, which would grow to

Reviewer: In _for its classes_, do you mean ROOT's classes? Is _vectors_ an example of a functionality, or a class? 

The audience here is likely to be familiar with NumPy arrays, but not with ROOT. What vector functionality was ROOT providing that wasn't available in NumPy?

Author: Clarified "spacial and Lorentz vectors".

become one of the most important and most general packages in Scikit-HEP. This
package allowed NumPy-like idioms for array-at-a-time manipulation and access

> to jagged data structures. These are common in HEP; events have a variable

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to jagged data structures. These are very common and relevant in HEP; events have a variable
```

> package allowed NumPy-like idioms for array-at-a-time manipulation and access

Reviewer: It doesn't allow them anymore?

Author: Oops. Uproot-methods has been superseded (by Vector), but Awkward is still present.

> to jagged data structures. These are very common and relevant in HEP; events have a variable

Reviewer: The next three sentences all have multiple independent clauses joined with semicolons -- this might be a sign that we are missing a good linking structure between the ideas

Author: Reworked them a bit.

number of tracks, tracks have a variable number of hits in the detector, etc.
Many other fields also have jagged data structures; while there are formats to

> store such structures, computations on jagged structures have usually been

Reviewer: I don't think I understand this sentence. Tables in SQL are rectangular -- how are computations on variable-length data streams like SQL?

Author: I've clarified it a bit, it's done via multiple tables with relative keys. "actors in a movie database", for example. I also added that pandas multindexing does this.

closer to SQL than NumPy.

> Uproot was a huge hit with incoming HEP students; suddenly they could access

Reviewer: What did it mean to be a "huge hit"?

Author: @jpivarski might have plots or numbers? (also, Jim, I think a couple of plots from your most recent presentation might fit in this paper?)

Reviewer 3: Do you mean this plot?

[![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1852447/176791377-6dec3b4f-627d-42a9-8afb-b51c34afa032.png)](https://github.com/matthewfeickert/talk-doepy-python-exchange-2022/blob/main/figures/github-package-fullstudy-for-review.pdf)

It highlights the adoption of NumPy, Matplotlib, Pandas, and TensorFlow in HEP (in terms of "`import X`" matches in CMS physicist GitHub repos). Although Uproot and Awkward Array are on the plot and Uproot is at the same level of adoption as TensorFlow, there isn't an arrow pointing it out. It also comes with the cost of explaining how this study was performed, what the "ROOT" baseline is, and why other libraries weren't highlighted here. (The most popular in each category are shown, cut off for plot space.)

Is that something we want to include?

There are also pip download rates, which are a different kind of measure. This one could be good for Scikit-HEP overall.

[![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1852447/176791968-65f88629-5be3-48f5-9ba6-a91a3c5d8206.png)](https://github.com/matthewfeickert/talk-doepy-python-exchange-2022/blob/main/figures/pip-macwin-scikithep-log-by-package.pdf)

The lines don't cross because they are stacked time-histograms, and the largest contributors are on the top (because addition only shows up well on a log scale if the smallest addends are in the most magnified part of the log-scale).

Reviewer 2: These are great plots. FWIW I think the top one is more suitable for these proceedings and wider audience. The bottom plot contains as-is too much information for the audience, though the fact 50 increase is something significant and at least worth mention in words. I let you decide if you prefer to add both or just one :-).

> HEP data using pip or conda, use tools they already knew like Pandas and the

Reviewer: I'm guessing you mean that they could access HEP data using libraries installed via pip or conda?

Author: Yes, added that.

> rapidly growing machine learning frameworks. There were still some gaps and

Reviewer: Do we want to be explicit about the tools that were interoperable?

Author: If you are interoperable with NumPy, that's most tools (minus direct conversion with GPU libraries, but you aren't reading data directly in the GPU anyway).

Author: Specified the Python buffer protocol and mentioned one more library (numpy).

> pain points in the ecosystem, but an analysis without C++ or compiling ROOT was

Reviewer: I'm guessing you mean they did not need to interact with C++ directly? Also, I'm seeing the word "analysis" used a lot to describe the workflows served by this tool -- does this have a specific technical meaning in HEP that it doesn't have in other fields?

Author: An analysis is studying the recored data, as opposed to data acquisition or simulation, which is generally handled in a C++ framework configured with Python. Does that need to be specified somewhere?

Reviewer 3: We're talking about user analysis code (e.g. which particles should be identified as parts of the same decay as each other) written directly in C++ with a write-compile-run workflow and components that need to be binary-compatible to be used together. That was the situation HEP analysis was in before the analysis could be done directly in Python. (We didn't come from another scripting language, like IDL or something.)

Author: Added a tiny bit more detail.

finally possible. Scikit-HEP did not and does not intend to "replace" ROOT, but

> it provides solutions that work natively in the Python ecosystem, which in this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it provides alternative solutions that work natively in the Python "Big Data" ecosystem, which in this
```

> finally possible. Scikit-HEP did not and does not intend to "replace" ROOT, but

Reviewer: Why is replace in quotation marks?

Author: I can remove them.

> it provides alternative solutions that work natively in the Python "Big Data" ecosystem, which in this

Reviewer: I'm having a hard time glossing this sentence: _it provides alternative solutions which was to remove the ROOT requirement_.

Author: I'll just remove that last part, doesn't add much.

case was to remove the ROOT requirement from reading data files.

> Several other useful HEP libraries were also written. Particle for accessing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Several other useful HEP libraries were also written.For example: Particle for accessing
```

> Several other useful HEP libraries were also written.For example: Particle for accessing

Reviewer: More libraries, more better! Is there a reason we didn't list them with the rest of the tools at the top of this section?

Author: The only other list was of tools that joined Scikit-HEP, not written to be a library in Scikit-HEP to begin with. Seems reasonable here?

the Particle Data Group (PDG) particle data in a simple and Pythonic way.
DecayLanguage originally provided tooling for decay definitions, but was

> quickly expanded to include tools to read and validate "DEC" decay files, an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
quickly expanded to include tools to read and validate "DEC" decay files, an
```

> existing format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
existing text format used to configure simulations in HEP.
```

Building better
---------------

.. figure:: github-histogram-libraries.pdf
   :figclass: w
   :scale: 65%

   The landscape of different libraries for Histograms in HEP.

>    From the Analysis Ecosystem II Workshop.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   From the HEP Software Foundation Analysis Ecosystems II Workshop, May 2022.
```

   :label:`fig-github-histogram`

> In 2018, HEP physicist and programmer Hans Dembenski proposed a histogram

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In 2018, HEP physicist and programmer Hans Dembinski proposed a histogram
```

>    The landscape of different libraries for Histograms in HEP.

Reviewer: What's the motivation behind using monthly active committers as opposed to some other metric, like commits or downloads?

Author: Ahh, I think this is one of the main plots I was thinking of. @jpivarski can probably comment best on the reasoning. Downloads is really hard to get (batch jobs on grid systems can inflate, or even just the normal mirroring issues on PyPI), and commits can be one person working really hard (or large vs. tiny commit style), but doesn't show general interest quite as well.

Reviewer 3: The intention of the histogram plot is to show developer activity, not user activity. "Monthly unique committers" was chosen to show that this group of histogram libraries are in very active development, unlike the long-lived (and well-maintained) ROOT histograms, the rootpy project that was active too early (before Python was regularly used for analysis in HEP), and unlike the many small projects that sprung up around 2017 (when Python _was_ picked up for analysis in HEP).

That's why it has this metric.

User statistics would also be interesting, though usage is awaiting a bump that will come when Coffea users fully transition from Coffea histograms to hist. (I'm predicting the future here because Coffea developers are deliberately steering users toward hist, but it takes time for adoption to switch.)

> In 2018, HEP physicist and programmer Hans Dembinski proposed a histogram

Reviewer: If the point of this section is to discuss advancements in building and packaging libraries, why do we start by talking about the large number of histogram libraries? That seems orthogonal to me?

Author: Retitled it a bit.

> library to the Boost libraries, the most respected C++ library collection. It

Reviewer: "the most respected C++ library collection" is a pretty bold claim. Do we want to qualify this? Or provide some evidence for it?

Author: I've added a mention that many stdlib additions come from Boost. I was worried about adding that since the point isn't that Boost.Histogram expects to be added to the C++ standard.

> provided a histogram-as-an-object concept from HEP, but rethought histograms in

Reviewer: Can we clarify that we are talking about the proposal, and not Boost?

> provided a histogram-as-an-object concept from HEP, but rethought histograms in

Reviewer: If he was rethought histograms in C++14, what did the original thought look like?

C++14, using composable axes and storage types. It originally had an initial
Python binding, written in Boost::Python. Henry Schreiner proposed the creation
of a standalone binding to be written with pybind11 in Scikit-HEP. The original
bindings were removed, Boost::Histogram was accepted into the Boost libraries,
and work began on ``boost-histogram``. The IRIS-HEP grant had just started,
which was providing funding for several developers to work on Scikit-HEP

> projects such as this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
project packages such as this one.
```

> and work began on ``boost-histogram``. The IRIS-HEP grant had just started,

Reviewer: Did we define what IRIS-HEP is?

There were already a variety of attempts at histogram libraries, but none of

> them filled the requirements of HEP physicists, and most of them were not easy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
them filled the requirements of HEP physicists fully, and most of them were not easy
```

> them filled the requirements of HEP physicists fully, and most of them were not easy

Reviewer: Why was this?

to install or use. Any new attempt here would have to be clearly better than
the existing collection of diverse attempts (see Fig

> :ref:`fig-github-histogram`). The development of a library with compiled

Reviewer: We might need more detail about what this means for readers who haven't tried to package a python library with compiled dependencies.

components intended to be usable everywhere required good support for building
libraries.  Advancements in the packaging ecosystem, such as the wheel format
and the manylinux specification and docker image had made redistributable

> Python wheels possible, but there still were many challenges to making a new

Reviewer: I think we could rewrite _the wheel format made Python wheels possible_ to be more informative. 

What were the challenges in building libraries? What made the wheel format better for distributing binaries? Why was the manylinux specification important for supporting multiple architectures?

> library that could be used anywhere.

Reviewer: Are we going to see these challenges enumerated below?

> The boost-histogram library only depended on header-only components of the

Reviewer: I would guess that many people at SciPy will not know what a header file is.

Author: Added a bit more detail after.

Boost libraries, and the header only pybind11 package, and all needed files

> were packed into the SDist, and everything was possible using only setuptools,

Reviewer: Have we defined what an SDist is?

making build-from-source simple on any system supporting C++14 (which did not
include RHEL 7 or manylinux1).

The first stand-alone development was ``azure-wheel-helpers``, a set of files
that helped produce wheels on the new Azure Pipelines platform. Building

> redistributable wheels requires a variety of techniques, even without shared

Reviewer: A variety of techniques like what? How do they vary?

Author: Added some.

libraries, that vary dramatically between platforms and were/are poorly
documented. This worked well, and was quickly adapted for the other packages in
Scikit-HEP that included non-ROOT binary components. Work here would eventually

> be merged into ``cibuildwheel``, which would become the build tool for all

Reviewer: What is cibuildwheel? Is it a part of scikit-hep?

non-ROOT binary packages in Scikit-HEP.

The second major development was the upstreaming of CI and build system
developments to pybind11. Pybind11 provided significant benefits to our

> packages over (mis)-using Cython for bindings; reduced maintenance, simpler

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
packages over (mis)-using Cython for bindings: reduced maintenance, simpler
```

> developments to pybind11. Pybind11 provided significant benefits to our

Reviewer: Have we explained what pybind11 is?

Author: Added

builds, no need to pin NumPy when building, and a cross-package API. The
``iMinuit`` package was later moved to pybind11 as well, and pybind11 became

> the Scikit-HEP recommended binding tool. Scikit-HEP developers contributed a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the Scikit-HEP recommended binding tool. Scikit-HEP developers, notably Henry Schreiner, contributed a
```

> packages over (mis)-using Cython for bindings: reduced maintenance, simpler

Reviewer: What does it mean to misuse Cython for C bindings?

Author: Expanded.

> ``iMinuit`` package was later moved to pybind11 as well, and pybind11 became

Reviewer: Moved to pybind11 from what?

Author: Cython.

> the Scikit-HEP recommended binding tool. Scikit-HEP developers, notably Henry Schreiner, contributed a

Reviewer: It feels weird to Dillon Niederhut to see people talk about themselves with their proper name. Maybe we could say _scikit-hep developers, including the authors, worked on the following improvements..._?

Author: > It feels weird to Dillon Niederhut to see people talk about themselves with their proper name.

Best review comment. :). I think Eduardo actually reworded this, don't think I wrote it. But maybe Henry Schreiner did.

variety of fixes and features to pybind11, including positional and keyword
arguments, prepending to the overload chain, type access and manipulation,
completely redesigned CMake integration, a new pure-Setuptools helpers, and a

> complete CI redesign based on GitHub Actions, with over 70 jobs and expanded

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
complete CI redesign based on GitHub Actions, with over 70 jobs, and expanded
```

> variety of fixes and features to pybind11, including positional and keyword

Reviewer: This is a very long sentence, and some of these items could probably use an explanation.

> compiler support. We also helped improve all the example projects.

Reviewer: What does it mean to improve an example project?

Author: Expanded a bit.

This example of a project with binary components being usable everywhere then
encouraged the development of Awkward 1.0, a rewrite of AwkwardArray replacing
the Python-only code with compiled code, fixing some long-standing limitations
and enabling further developments in backends :cite:`pivarski2020awkward`.

> Scikit-HEP was becoming a "toolset", a collection of packages that worked together

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scikit-HEP had become a reasonably popular "toolset" for HEP analysis in Python, a collection of packages that worked together,
```

> the Python-only code with compiled code, fixing some long-standing limitations

Reviewer: What limitations did it fix? What further developments did it enable?

> Scikit-HEP had become a reasonably popular "toolset" for HEP analysis in Python, a collection of packages that worked together,

Reviewer: Had become popular by what point in time? Popular by what definition?

> instead of a "toolkit" like ROOT, which is one monopackage that tries to

Reviewer: If this section is about improvements in building and packaging, why are we talking about a distinction between toolkits and toolsets?

Author: This should have been in the section below (header is one paragraph too low).

provide everything :cite:`Rodrigues:2020syo`.  A toolset is more natural in the
Python ecosystem, where we have good packaging tools and many existing
libraries. Scikit-HEP only needed to fill existing gaps, instead of covering
every possible aspect of an analysis like ROOT (from 1994) did. The
``scikit-hep`` package started to be pulled out into separate packages, and
instead simply was becoming a metapackage that would install a useful subset of

> libraries for an physicist starting a new analysis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
libraries for a physicist starting a new analysis.
```

> libraries. Scikit-HEP only needed to fill existing gaps, instead of covering

Reviewer: Why is not including ROOT relevant to the topic of this section? Why is it relevant that it was written in 1994?

Author: This ecosystem didn't exist then. But I think it's best just to remove the remark.

> ``scikit-hep`` package started to be pulled out into separate packages, and

Reviewer: Wait -- was scikit-hep a collection of packages? Or was it a single package that needed to be split up?

Author: Scikit-HEP was an organization, and `scikit-hep` was a pip-installable package in that origination. It was later turned into just a metapackage installing our core packages. Tried to clarify that here.

Broader ecosystem
-----------------

Scikit-HEP was quickly becoming the center of Python focused analysis in HEP

> (see Fig. :ref:`fig-shells`).  Several other projects joined Scikit-HEP, like

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(see Fig. :ref:`fig-shells`).  Several other projects or packages joined Scikit-HEP, like
```

> instead simply was becoming a metapackage that would install a useful subset of

Reviewer: I think not everyone will know what a metapackage is

Reviewer 2: I think for a scientific conference proceedings we should not go and define concepts such as that. Anyone can check a dictionary (imagine the novelist not using "fancy words" that many may not know because they would have to define them ;-)).

Reviewer: Is your argument that knowing about science implies knowing about packaging? I would think those are orthogonal?

Reviewer: SciPy is a generalist audience, so we do ask authors to define field-specific terms -- you can see more about our paper critieria here: https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/blob/master/review_criteria.md

Reviewer 2: > Is your argument that knowing about science implies knowing about packaging? I would think those are orthogonal?

No, I would not say that at all.

Fair enough, having quidelines/criteria for homogeneity is good and we should comply.

Author: I feel like it was defined immediately afterwards, but I've tried to clarify.

> iMinuit, a popular HEP and astrophysics fitting library, was probably the most

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
iMinuit, a popular HEP and astrophysics fitting library, probably the most
```

> popular single package to join. PyHF and cabinetry also joined; these were

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
popular single package to have joined. PyHF and cabinetry also joined; these were
```

> Scikit-HEP was quickly becoming the center of Python focused analysis in HEP

Reviewer: I'm not sure that figure 1 shows how quickly the number of libraries associated with scikit-hep grew.

Author: I've changed this to be a center of HEP specific Python software.

> iMinuit, a popular HEP and astrophysics fitting library, probably the most

Reviewer: We have a dangling dependent clause here modifying iMinuit -- it might be nice to shorten simplify this a little bit.

Author: Improved.

> popular single package to have joined. PyHF and cabinetry also joined; these were

Reviewer: Most popular by what measure? Is that relevant to scikit-hep's growth? Did its popularity bring in other packages?

Author: Changed to widely used.

> larger frameworks built on Scikit-HEP packages.

Reviewer: To a reader who is not in HEP, I don't know how compelling it is to list out package names like this.

Other packages, like Coffea and zFit, were not added, but were built on
Scikit-HEP packages and had developers working closely with Scikit-HEP
maintainers. Scikit-HEP introduced an "affiliated" classification, which
allowed an external package to be listed on the Scikit-HEP website. Currently
all affiliated packages have at least one Scikit-HEP developer as a maintainer,
though that is currently not a requirement.  An affiliated package fills a

> particular need, Scikit-HEP doesn't have to attempt to develop a package, but

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
particular need for the community. Scikit-HEP doesn't have to, or need to, attempt to develop a package that others are providing, but rather tries to ensure that the externally provided package
```

> maintainers. Scikit-HEP introduced an "affiliated" classification, which

Reviewer: Cool! What benefits / synergies did this provide?

Author: Expanded this a bit, but one of the purposes is to clarify that we don't need to develop things that affiliated packages already provide.

> can just use the external one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
works well with the broader HEP ecosystem.
```

> Scikit-HEP continued to grow with new packages as well. Vector manipulation,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scikit-HEP continues to grow with new packages: for example, vector manipulation,
```

> though that is currently not a requirement.  An affiliated package fills a

Reviewer: It feels like this could be a good place to mention other efforts at coordination, like:

- the array format standard (Oliphant)
- the table format standard that Gael floated a couple years ago
- coordination in the scientific python community at large, presented at this conference last year, Millman and van der Walt

which had been part of the original scikit-hep "package", and had been
rewritten (as the unreleased HEPVector and also in uproot-methods) was finally
put together into a package "Vector", and include Awkward and Numba backends.
Mplhep added important matplotlib plot types and style for HEP usage.

> Histogramming was designed to be a collection of specialized packages

Reviewer 2: Need to put this in the same paragraph? Otherwise it does not overall read well.

> Scikit-HEP continues to grow with new packages: for example, vector manipulation,

Reviewer: This has been repeated pretty often -- is this the key point that you want people to take away from the paper?

> Mplhep added important matplotlib plot types and style for HEP usage.

Reviewer: Again, I'm not sure how compelling it is to list a bunch of library names.

Author: I think both of these were actually covered elsewhere, I can just remove this paragraph.

> Histogramming was designed to be a collection of specialized packages

Reviewer: Why is it important that it was designed this way? Does having this design support the section topic of having a broad ecosystem?

Author: Tried to add a tiny bit more here.

(see Fig. :ref:`fig-histogram`); boost-histogram for manipulation and filling,
Hist for a user-friendly interface and simple plotting tools, histoprint for
displaying histograms, and the existing mplhep and uproot packages also needed

> to be able to work with histograms. This ecosystem was build and is held

Reviewer: was built?

together with UHI, which is a formal specification, backed by a statically
typed Protocol, for a PlottableHistogram object. Producers of histograms, like
boost-histogram/hist and uproot provide objects that follow this specification,
and users of histograms, such as mplhep and histoprint take any object that
follows this specification. UHI is not required at runtime, though it does
provide a few simple utilities to help a library also accept ROOT histograms,
which do not (currently) follow the Protocol.

> One example of a package pulling together many components was

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One example of a package pulling together many components is
```

> typed Protocol, for a PlottableHistogram object. Producers of histograms, like

Reviewer: Protocols are cool! Do other things in scikit-hep use this strategy? Are protocols part of your strategy for having an ecosystem of tools that all play nicely together?

Author: Yes, tried to highlight that a bit more. Jim does a better job of highlighting this in his talks.

> ``uproot-browswer``, a tool that combined uproot, hist, and Python libraries

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``uproot-browser``, a tool that combines uproot, Hist, and Python libraries
```

> follows this specification. UHI is not required at runtime, though it does

Reviewer: Wait, so this is a convention and not a protocol? Or am I misunderstanding?

Author: No, it's a Protocol. It's just that you don't need the Protocol at runtime, only at typecheck time. But the library has a few useful tools (mostly because PyROOT from the ROOT team doesn't support the Protocol, at least yet), so you'll actually see it as a runtime dependency of some of our libraries (mplhep uses it, specifically). Maybe this is entirely unneeded information, I'm just not wanting someone to look up mplhep and see UHI is required and not realize why.

I went the add more way rather than the remove some way here, but could switch.

> One example of a package pulling together many components is

Reviewer: Why is this important?

Author: Added an intro sentence.

like textual and plotext to provide a terminal browser for ROOT files.

.. figure:: histogram-convergence.pdf

   The collection of histogram packages and related packages in Scikit-HEP.
   :label:`fig-histogram`

Scikit-HEP's external contributions continued to grow. One of the most notable

> ones was our work on cibuildwheel. This was a Python package that supported

Reviewer: What did you add to cibuildwheel?

building redistributable wheels on multiple CI systems. Unlike our own

> ``azure-wheel-helpers`` or the competing multibuild package, it was written in

Reviewer: How is being written in Python a requirement for having good practices?

Author: Expanded a bit: unit and integration tests, static checks, and independent of CI system.

Python, so good practices in package design could apply, and it was easy to
remain independent of the underlying CI system. Building wheels on Linux

> requires a docker image, macOS requires the python.org Python, and Windows can

Reviewer: Is this true? I'm pretty sure I've built a package on linux without using docker.

Author: Was it redistributable? It's not easy or supported to make a wheel and process it into manylinux on an arbitrary system. There's an exact list of what is allowed; building on a different image could easily include something that is not supported across the "many linuxes".

use any copy of Python - cibuildwheel uses this to supply Python in all cases,
which keeps it from depending on the CI's support for a particular Python

> version. We merged our improvments to cibuildwheel, dropped

Reviewer: What improvements?

Author: Looked it up and added it.

azure-wheel-helpers, and eventually joined the cibuildwheel project.
``cibuildwheel`` would go on to join the PyPA, and is now in use in over 600
packages, including ``numpy``, ``matplotlib``, ``mypy``, ``scikit-learn``, and
more.

> Our continued contributions to cibuildwheel included a new TOML-based

Reviewer: When chaining together a bunch of dependent clauses like this, it's a good practice to keep the parts of speech the same -- say, always starting with a noun. So maybe _an override system... the ability to build directly..._. It's also a pretty long sentence, and it might be worth breaking this up into bullet points or something like that.

configuration system for cibuildwheel 2.0, an override system to make
supporting multiple manylinux and musllinux targets easier, build directly from
SDists, option to use ``build`` instead of ``pip``, automatic detection of

> python version requirements, better globbing support, and more. We also helped

Reviewer: If they matter, we can enumerate what the other capabilities are. If they don't matter, I don't see what we gain by adding _and more_.

Author: Avoided the "and more" with minor rewording. It's a little hard to pick out what I contributed vs. what I reviewed and helped with exactly. I've made 118 successful PRs to cibuildwheel. :)

> fully statically type the codebase, apply various checks and style controls,

Reviewer: We ❤ mypy

automate CI processes, improve support for special platforms like CPython 3.8
on macOS Apple Silicon, and much more.

> We also have helped with ``build``, ``nox``, ``pyodide``, and many other packages.

Reviewer: Why is this important?

Author: Added a bit.

Python in WebAssembly directly inside a user's browser. Now anyone visiting the
page can enter their repository and branch, and see the adoption report in a
couple of seconds.

Working toward the future
-------------------------

Scikit-HEP is looking toward the future in several different areas. We have
been working with the Pyodide developers to support WebAssembly;
boost-histogram is compiled into Pyodide 0.20, and Pyodide's support for
pybind11 packages is significantly better due to that work, including adding
support for C++ exception handling. PyHF's documentation includes a live
Pyodide kernel, and a try-pyhf site (based on the repo-review tool) lets users
run a model without installing anything - it can even be saved as a webapp on
mobile devices.

We have also been working with Scikit-Build to try to provide a modern build
experience in Python using CMake. This project is just starting, but we expect
over the next year or two that the usage of CMake as a first class build tool
for binaries in Python will be possible using modern developments and avoiding
distutils/setuptools hacks.

Summary
-------

> The Scikit-HEP project started in 2016 and has grown to be a core component in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Scikit-HEP project started in Autumn 2016 and has grown to be a core component in
```

:email: eduardo.rodrigues@cern.ch
:institution: University of Liverpool

:bibliography: mybib

--------------------------------------
Awkward Packaging: building Scikit-HEP
--------------------------------------

.. class:: abstract

   Scikit-HEP has grown rapidly over the last few years, not just to serve the
   needs of the High Energy Physics (HEP) community, but in many ways, the
   Python ecosystem at large. AwkwardArray, boost-histogram/hist, and iminuit
   are examples of libraries that are used beyond the original HEP focus. In
   these proceedings, we will look key packages in the ecosystem, at how the
   collection of 30+ packages was developed and maintained, and the software
   ecosystem contributions made to packages like cibuildwheel, pybind11, nox,
   scikit-build, build, and pipx that support this effort, and the Scikit-HEP
   developer pages, and initial WebAssembly support.

.. class:: keywords

   packaging, ecosystem, high energy physics, community project

Introduction
------------

..
   High Energy Physics needs. Info about dataset size, etc. Historical ROOT info.

High Energy Physics (HEP) has always had intense computing needs due to the

> size and scale of the data collected. The World Wide Web was invented at CERN in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
size and scale of the data collected. The World Wide Web was invented at the CERN Physics laboratory in Switzerland in
```

> 1989 when scientists at CERN in the EU were trying to communicate results with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1989 when scientists in the EU were trying to communicate results with
```

> scientist in the US :cite:`leiner2009brief`.  Today, we have the largest

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
scientist in the US, and vice-versa :cite:`leiner2009brief`.  Today, HEP has the largest
```

> machine in the world at CERN: the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), 27 km in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
scientific machine in the world, at CERN: the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), 27 km in
```

circumference :cite:`evans2008lhc`, with multiple experiments with thousands of
collaborators processing over a petabyte of raw data every day, with 100
petabytes being stored per year at CERN. This is one of the largest scientific

> dataset in the world of exabyte scale :cite:`peters2011exabyte`, which is roughly

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
datasets in the world of exabyte scale :cite:`peters2011exabyte`, which is roughly
```

comparable in order of magnitude to all of astronomy or YouTube :cite:`stephens2015big`.

HEP scientists have been interested in Python since 1993
:cite:`templon_jeffrey_2022_6353621`. With the release of Python 1.0.0 in 1994,
a few physicists started using Python. A year later, the ROOT project
for an analysis toolkit (and framework) was released, making C++ the main
language for HEP. The ROOT project also needed an interpreted language to
driving analysis code. Python was rejected for this role due to being "exotic"
at the time, and because it was considered too much to ask physicists to code
in two languages. Instead, ROOT provided a C++ interpreter, called CINT, which
later was replaced with Cling, which is the basis for the clang-repl project in
LLVM today :cite:`ifrim2022gpu`.

Python would start showing up in the late 90's in experiment frameworks as a
configuration language. These frameworks were primarily written in C++, but
were made of many configurable parts :cite:`LAMMEL199832`; the glueing together
of the system was done in Python - a model still popular today, though some
experiments are now using Python + Numba as an alternative model,

> like Xenon1T :cite:`remenska2017giving,rousselle2021fast`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
such as for example the Xenon1T experiment :cite:`remenska2017giving,rousselle2021fast`.
```

In the early 2000s, the use of Python HEP exploded, heavily driven by

> experiments like LHCb at CERN developing frameworks and user tools for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
experiments like LHCb developing frameworks and user tools for
```

Reviewer 2: (Indeed no longer needed to specify "at CERN" since done above.)

scripting. ROOT started providing Python bindings in 2004
:cite:`generowicz2004reflection` that were not considered Pythonic
:cite:`galli2020new`, and still required a complex multi-hour build of ROOT to
use [#]_. Analyses still consisted largely of ROOT, with Python sometimes
showing up.

.. [#] Almost 20 years later ROOT's Python bindings have been rewritten for
   easier Pythonizations, and installing ROOT in Conda is now much easier,
   thanks in large part to efforts from Scikit-HEP developers.

By the mid 2010's, a marked change had occurred. Many students were coming in
with little or no C++ experience, but had existing knowledge of Python and the

> growing Python data science ecosystem, like NumPy and Pandas. Several analyses

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
growing Python data science ecosystem, like NumPy and Pandas. Several HEP experiment analyses
```

were performed driven by Python, with ROOT only being used for things that were not

> available in the Python ecosystem. Some of these were HEP specific: ROOT was

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
available in the Python ecosystem. Some of these were HEP specific: ROOT is
```

also a data format, so users needed to be able to read data from ROOT files.
Others were less specific: HEP users have intense histogram requirements due to
the data sizes, large portions of HEP data is "jagged" rather than rectangular,
vectors manipulation was important (especially Lorenz Vectors, a four
dimensional relativistic vector with a non-Euclidean metric), and data fitting

> was important, especially with complex models and excellent error estimation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
was important, especially with complex models and accurate error estimation.
```

.. figure:: shells-hep.pdf

   The Scikit-HEP ecosystem and affiliated packages.
   :label:`fig-shells`

Beginnings of a scikit
----------------------

..
   About how it was planned and built.

In 2016, the ecosystem for Python in HEP was rather fragmented. There were
a handful of popular packages that were useful in HEP spread around among
different authors. The rootpy project had several packages that made the
ROOT-Python bridge a little easier, such as the ``root-numpy`` and related
``root-pandas`` packages. The C++ MINUIT fitting library was integrated into
ROOT, but the ``iminuit`` package :cite:`iminuit` provided an easy to install
standalone Python package with an extracted copy of MINUIT. Several other
specialized standalone C++ packages had bindings as well. Many of the initial
authors were transitioning to a less-code centric role or leaving for industry,
leaving projects like rootpy and iminuit without maintainers.

> Eduardo Rodrigues, a scientist working on the LHCb experiment at CERN for the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Eduardo Rodrigues, a scientist working on the LHCb experiment for the
```

University of Cincinnati, started working on a package called ``scikit-hep``

> that would provide a set to tools useful for physicists working on an analysis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that would provide a set to tools useful for physicists working on HEP analysis.
```

The initial version of the ``scikit-hep`` package had a simple vector library,

> unit conversions, several useful statistical tools, and provenance recording

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HEP related units and conversions, several useful statistical tools, and provenance recording
```

functionality,

He also placed the GitHub repository into a GitHub organization of the same
name, and asked several of the other HEP related packages to join. The ROOTPy
project was ending, with the primary author moving on, and so several of the
then-popular packages [#]_ that were included in the rootpy organization were
happily transferred to Scikit-HEP. Several other existing HEP libraries,
primarily interfacing to existing C++ simulation and tracking frameworks, also

> joined, like IMinuit, Probfit, PyJet, and NumPythia. Some of these libraries

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
joined, like ``IMinuit``, ``Probfit``, ``PyJet``, and ``NumPythia``. Some of these libraries
```

have been retired or replaced today, but were an important part of Scikit-HEP's
initial growth.

.. [#] The primary package rootpy was not transferred, but instead had a final

>    release and then died. It was an insperation for the new PyROOT bindings,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   release and then died. It was an inspiration for the new PyROOT bindings,
```

>    and influenced later Scikit-HEP packages like mplhep. The transferred

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   and influenced later Scikit-HEP packages like ``mplhep``. The transferred
```

Reviewer 2: @henryiii, some packages are not in double backslashes. Will you do a final read to catch remaining instances without?

   libraries have since been replaced by integrated ROOT functionality. All
   three packages required ROOT, which is not on PyPI, so were not suited for a
   Python-centric ecosystem.

First initial success
---------------------

In 2016, the largest barrier to using Python in HEP in a Pythonic way was
ROOT. It was a challenging compile, a huge "library", not very Pythonic,
and didn't play well with packaging. Many analyses started with a "convert data"
step and worked with a Python friendly format like HDF5.

> This changed when Jim Pivarski introduced Uproot (originally envisioned as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This changed when Jim Pivarski introduced the ``Uproot`` package (originally envisioned as
```

"µroot"). This was a pure-Python implementation of a ROOT file reader (and
later writer) that could remove the initial conversions step by simply
pip installing a package. It also had a simple, Pythonic interface and produced
"nice" outputs, like NumPy arrays.

Uproot was not just a file format reader; it quickly split into three packages.

> One, uproot-methods, included Pythonic access to functionality provided by ROOT

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One, ``uproot-methods``, included Pythonic access to functionality provided by ROOT
```

for its classes, like vectors. The other was AwkwardArray, which would grow to
become one of the most important and most general packages in Scikit-HEP. This
package allowed NumPy-like idioms for array-at-a-time manipulation and access
to jagged data structures. These are very common and relevant in HEP; events have a variable
number of tracks, tracks have a variable number of hits in the detector, etc.
Many other fields also have jagged data structures; while there are formats to
store such structures, computations on jagged structures have usually been
closer to SQL than NumPy.

Uproot was a huge hit with incoming HEP students; suddenly they could access
HEP data using pip or conda, use tools they already knew like Pandas and the
rapidly growing machine learning frameworks. There were still some gaps and
pain points in the ecosystem, but an analysis without C++ or compiling ROOT was
finally possible. Scikit-HEP did not and does not intend to "replace" ROOT, but
it provides alternative solutions that work natively in the Python "Big Data" ecosystem, which in this
case was to remove the ROOT requirement from reading data files.

> Several other useful HEP libraries were also written.For example: Particle for accessing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Several other useful HEP libraries were also written. For example, ``Particle`` for accessing
```

the Particle Data Group (PDG) particle data in a simple and Pythonic way.

> DecayLanguage originally provided tooling for decay definitions, but was

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``DecayLanguage`` originally provided tooling for decay definitions, but was
```

been working with the Pyodide developers to support WebAssembly;
boost-histogram is compiled into Pyodide 0.20, and Pyodide's support for
pybind11 packages is significantly better due to that work, including adding
support for C++ exception handling. PyHF's documentation includes a live
Pyodide kernel, and a try-pyhf site (based on the repo-review tool) lets users
run a model without installing anything - it can even be saved as a webapp on
mobile devices.

We have also been working with Scikit-Build to try to provide a modern build
experience in Python using CMake. This project is just starting, but we expect
over the next year or two that the usage of CMake as a first class build tool
for binaries in Python will be possible using modern developments and avoiding
distutils/setuptools hacks.

Summary
-------

The Scikit-HEP project started in Autumn 2016 and has grown to be a core component in
many HEP analyses. It has also provided packages that are growing in usage
outside of HEP, like AwkwardArray, boost-histogram/Hist, and iMinuit. The
tooling developed and improved by Scikit-HEP has helped Scikit-HEP developers

> as well as the broader Python ecosystem. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as well as the broader Python community.
```

.. class:: keywords

   packaging, ecosystem, high energy physics, community project

Introduction
------------

..
   High Energy Physics needs. Info about dataset size, etc. Historical ROOT info.

High Energy Physics (HEP) has always had intense computing needs due to the
size and scale of the data collected. The World Wide Web was invented at the CERN Physics laboratory in Switzerland in
1989 when scientists in the EU were trying to communicate results with
scientist in the US, and vice-versa :cite:`leiner2009brief`.  Today, HEP has the largest
scientific machine in the world, at CERN: the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), 27 km in
circumference :cite:`evans2008lhc`, with multiple experiments with thousands of
collaborators processing over a petabyte of raw data every day, with 100
petabytes being stored per year at CERN. This is one of the largest scientific
datasets in the world of exabyte scale :cite:`peters2011exabyte`, which is roughly
comparable in order of magnitude to all of astronomy or YouTube :cite:`stephens2015big`.

HEP scientists have been interested in Python since 1993
:cite:`templon_jeffrey_2022_6353621`. With the release of Python 1.0.0 in 1994,

> a few physicists started using Python. A year later, the ROOT project

Author: ```suggestion
a few physicists started exploring the use of Python. A year later, the ROOT project
```

:author: Henry Schreiner
:email: henryfs@princeton.edu
:institution: Princeton University

:author: Jim Pivarski
:email: pivarski@princeton.edu
:institution: Princeton University

:author: Eduardo Rodrigues

> :email: eduardo.rodrigues@cern.ch

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:email: eduardo.rodrigues@liverpool.ac.uk
```

:institution: University of Liverpool

:bibliography: mybib

--------------------------------------
Awkward Packaging: building Scikit-HEP
--------------------------------------

.. class:: abstract

   Scikit-HEP has grown rapidly over the last few years, not just to serve the
   needs of the High Energy Physics (HEP) community, but in many ways, the
   Python ecosystem at large. AwkwardArray, boost-histogram/hist, and iminuit
   are examples of libraries that are used beyond the original HEP focus. In

>    these proceedings, we will look key packages in the ecosystem, at how the

Reviewer: In this paper?

>    these proceedings, we will look key packages in the ecosystem, at how the

Reviewer: In this paper?

>    these proceedings, we will look key packages in the ecosystem, at how the

Reviewer: look at key packages?

>    these proceedings, we will look key packages in the ecosystem, at how the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   this paper we will look at key packages in the ecosystem, at how the
```

Reviewer 2: ("Proceedings" seemed more appropriate to me for a conference write-up. But if the review team prefers paper, that's fine too, of course.)

   collection of 30+ packages was developed and maintained, and the software

>    ecosystem contributions made to packages like cibuildwheel, pybind11, nox,

Reviewer: This is a very long sentence -- it might be easier to parse if it were broken up?

Author: Broke it up a little.

   scikit-build, build, and pipx that support this effort, and the Scikit-HEP
   developer pages, and initial WebAssembly support.

.. class:: keywords

   packaging, ecosystem, high energy physics, community project

Introduction
------------

..
   High Energy Physics needs. Info about dataset size, etc. Historical ROOT info.

High Energy Physics (HEP) has always had intense computing needs due to the

> size and scale of the data collected. The World Wide Web was invented at the CERN Physics laboratory in Switzerland in

Reviewer: I think I'm still missing how inventing WWW is relevant to intense compute needs.

Author: Added "and data" to "trying to communicate results and datasets".

1989 when scientists in the EU were trying to communicate results with
scientist in the US, and vice-versa :cite:`leiner2009brief`.  Today, HEP has the largest
scientific machine in the world, at CERN: the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), 27 km in
circumference :cite:`evans2008lhc`, with multiple experiments with thousands of
collaborators processing over a petabyte of raw data every day, with 100
petabytes being stored per year at CERN. This is one of the largest scientific
datasets in the world of exabyte scale :cite:`peters2011exabyte`, which is roughly
comparable in order of magnitude to all of astronomy or YouTube :cite:`stephens2015big`.

HEP scientists have been interested in Python since 1993
:cite:`templon_jeffrey_2022_6353621`. With the release of Python 1.0.0 in 1994,
a few physicists started exploring the use of Python. A year later, the ROOT project

> for an analysis toolkit (and framework) was released, making C++ the main

Reviewer: Most of this paragraph is about ROOT and its centrality, not about python per se. Would it make sense to change the topic sentence to reflect this?

Author: Added a topic sentence at the beginning to clarify this is about the selection of languages that happened in the mid 90's.

language for HEP. The ROOT project also needed an interpreted language to
driving analysis code. Python was rejected for this role due to being "exotic"
at the time, and because it was considered too much to ask physicists to code
in two languages. Instead, ROOT provided a C++ interpreter, called CINT, which
later was replaced with Cling, which is the basis for the clang-repl project in
LLVM today :cite:`ifrim2022gpu`.

Python would start showing up in the late 90's in experiment frameworks as a
configuration language. These frameworks were primarily written in C++, but

> were made of many configurable parts :cite:`LAMMEL199832`; the glueing together

Reviewer: This one sentence has a conjunction, a semi-colon, and an en-dash -- would it make sense to break this up?

Reviewer 2: Better break indeed. @henryiii, see if happy with the 2 little changes I'm suggesting.

> were made of many configurable parts :cite:`LAMMEL199832`; the glueing together

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
were made of many configurable parts :cite:`LAMMEL199832`. The glueing together
```

> of the system was done in Python - a model still popular today, though some

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the system was done in Python, a model still popular today, though some
```

experiments are now using Python + Numba as an alternative model,
such as for example the Xenon1T experiment :cite:`remenska2017giving,rousselle2021fast`.

In the early 2000s, the use of Python HEP exploded, heavily driven by
experiments like LHCb developing frameworks and user tools for
scripting. ROOT started providing Python bindings in 2004
:cite:`generowicz2004reflection` that were not considered Pythonic
:cite:`galli2020new`, and still required a complex multi-hour build of ROOT to
use [#]_. Analyses still consisted largely of ROOT, with Python sometimes
showing up.

.. [#] Almost 20 years later ROOT's Python bindings have been rewritten for
   easier Pythonizations, and installing ROOT in Conda is now much easier,
   thanks in large part to efforts from Scikit-HEP developers.

By the mid 2010's, a marked change had occurred. Many students were coming in
with little or no C++ experience, but had existing knowledge of Python and the
growing Python data science ecosystem, like NumPy and Pandas. Several HEP experiment analyses

> were performed driven by Python, with ROOT only being used for things that were not

Reviewer: Probably we only want either _performed_ or _driven_?

Reviewer 2: In fact the reality is *both*, meaning done in Python or driven by short Python scripts running C++. I adapted the sentence accordingly.

> were performed driven by Python, with ROOT only being used for things that were not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
were performed in, or driven by, Python, with ROOT only being used for things that were not
```

available in the Python ecosystem. Some of these were HEP specific: ROOT is
also a data format, so users needed to be able to read data from ROOT files.
Others were less specific: HEP users have intense histogram requirements due to

> the data sizes, large portions of HEP data is "jagged" rather than rectangular,

Reviewer: S/V agreement

> the data sizes, large portions of HEP data is "jagged" rather than rectangular,

Reviewer: Sequences of independent clauses are typically delineated by semicolons, not commas.

vectors manipulation was important (especially Lorenz Vectors, a four
dimensional relativistic vector with a non-Euclidean metric), and data fitting
was important, especially with complex models and accurate error estimation.

.. figure:: shells-hep.pdf

   The Scikit-HEP ecosystem and affiliated packages.
   :label:`fig-shells`

Beginnings of a scikit
----------------------

..
   About how it was planned and built.

In 2016, the ecosystem for Python in HEP was rather fragmented. There were
a handful of popular packages that were useful in HEP spread around among
different authors. The ROOTPy project had several packages that made the
ROOT-Python bridge a little easier than the built-in PyROOT, such as the
root-numpy and related root-pandas packages. The C++ MINUIT fitting
library was integrated into ROOT, but the iminuit package :cite:`iminuit`
provided an easy to install standalone Python package with an extracted copy of
MINUIT. Several other specialized standalone C++ packages had bindings as well.
Many of the initial authors were transitioning to a less-code centric role or
leaving for industry, leaving projects like ROOTPy and iminuit without
maintainers.

> Eduardo Rodrigues, a scientist working on the LHCb experiment for the

Reviewer: I think we should be explicit that Eduardo is one of the authors on this paper.

Author: Sure, how should I word that?

> University of Cincinnati, started working on a package called scikit-hep

Reviewer: Should this be scikit-HEP?

Author: The package is `scikit-hep`, the org is Scikit-HEP. Unless you are NumPy, in which case we seem to be scikit-HEP.

He also placed the GitHub repository into a GitHub organization of the same
name, and asked several of the other HEP related packages to join. The ROOTPy
project was ending, with the primary author moving on, and so several of the
then-popular packages [#]_ that were included in the ROOTPy organization were
happily transferred to Scikit-HEP. Several other existing HEP libraries,
primarily interfacing to existing C++ simulation and tracking frameworks, also
joined, like PyJet and NumPythia. Some of these libraries have been
retired or replaced today, but were an important part of Scikit-HEP's initial
growth.

.. [#] The primary package of the ROOTPy project, also called ROOTPy, was not
   transferred, but instead had a final release and then died. It was an
   inspiration for the new PyROOT bindings, and influenced later Scikit-HEP
   packages like mplhep. The transferred libraries have since been replaced
   by integrated ROOT functionality. All these packages required ROOT, which is
   not on PyPI, so were not suited for a Python-centric ecosystem.

First initial success
---------------------

In 2016, the largest barrier to using Python in HEP in a Pythonic way was ROOT.

> It was challenging to compile, had many non-Python dependencies, was huge

Reviewer: Is huge referring to the compiled size or the large number of source files?

Author: Both? Though I was intending size (it still can't fit into a wheel on PyPI, the conda-forge version takes up a couple of GB when installed)

compared to most Python libraries, not very Pythonic, and didn't play well with
packaging. Many Python analyses started with a "convert data" step using PyROOT
to read ROOT files and convert them to a Python friendly format like HDF5. Then
the bulk of the analysis would use reproducible Python virtual environments or
Conda environments.

This changed when Jim Pivarski introduced the Uproot package, a pure-Python
implementation of a ROOT file reader (and
later writer) that could remove the initial conversion environment by simply
pip installing a package. It also had a simple, Pythonic interface and produced
outputs Python users could immediately use, like NumPy arrays, instead of
PyROOT's wrapped C++ pointers.

Uproot needed to do more than just be file format reader/writer; it needed to
provide a way to represent the special structure and common objects that ROOT
files could contain. This lead to the development of two related packages that
would support uproot. One, uproot-methods, included Pythonic access to

> functionality provided by ROOT for its core classes, like spacial and Lorentz

Reviewer: Should this be spatial?

> functionality provided by ROOT for its core classes, like spacial and Lorentz

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
functionality provided by ROOT for its core classes, like spatial and Lorentz
```

vectors. The other was AwkwardArray, which would grow to become one of the most
important and most general packages in Scikit-HEP. This package allows
NumPy-like idioms for array-at-a-time manipulation on jagged data structures. A
jagged array is a (possibly structured) array with a variable length dimension.
These are very common and relevant in HEP; events have a variable number of
tracks, tracks have a variable number of hits in the detector, etc.  Many other
fields also have jagged data structures. While there are formats to store such
structures, computations on jagged structures have usually been closer to SQL
queries on multiple tables than direct object manipulation. Pandas handles this
through multiple indexing and a lot of duplication.

Uproot was a huge hit with incoming HEP students (see Fig
:ref:`fig-scikit-hep-growth`); suddenly they could access HEP data using a
library installed with pip or conda and no external compiler or library

> requirements, use tools they already knew that were compatible with the Python

Reviewer: I think we're missing a conjunction here?

buffer protocol, like NumPy, Pandas and the rapidly growing machine learning
frameworks. There were still some gaps and pain points in the ecosystem, but an
analysis without writing C++ (interpreted or compiled) and compiling ROOT
manually was finally possible. Scikit-HEP did not and does not intend to
replace ROOT, but it provides alternative solutions that work natively in the
Python "Big Data" ecosystem.

.. figure:: github-package-fullstudy-for-review.pdf
   :figclass: w
   :scale: 43%

   Adoption of scientific Python libraries and Scikit-HEP among members of the
   CMS experiment (one of the four major LHC experiments). CMS requires users to fork
   ``github:cms-sw/cmssw``, which can be used to identify 3484 physicist users,
   who created 16656 non-fork repos. This plot quantifies adoption by counting
   "``#include X``", "``import X``", and "``from X import``" strings in the users'
   code to measure adoption of various libraries (most popular by category are shown).
   :label:`fig-scikit-hep-growth`

Several other useful HEP libraries were also written. Particle was written for

> accessing the Particle Data Group (PDG) particle data in a simple and Pythonic

Reviewer: We've been throwing around this word _pythonic_ a lot. I think most people would take that to mean using python code idioms, like truthiness and generators. Is this what you mean? Or do you mean specifically that it doesn't return NumPy arrays and is hard to pip install?

If it's the latter, it might be worth using a different word. If the former, it might be nice to be explicit about what wasn't _pythonic_.

Author: ROOT doesn't support Python idioms, like the various protocols (iterators, context managers, buffer protocol (for NumPy arrays), useful `__repr__`s - basically a 1:1 mapping of C++, no nice dunder methods were injected. Later, the new PyROOT bindings added these (well, technically a way to add these, not all that many pythonizations have been added last I checked).

Basically Pythonic == support for Python idioms, usually by adding dunder methods. And naming conventions, repr styles, etc. I think making this explicit somewhere would be best.

Author: Added at the beginning.

way. DecayLanguage originally provided tooling for decay definitions, but was
quickly expanded to include tools to read and validate "DEC" decay files, an
existing text format used to configure simulations in HEP.

Building compiled packages
--------------------------

.. figure:: github-histogram-libraries.pdf
   :figclass: w
   :scale: 43%

   Developer activity on histogram libraries in HEP: number of unique committers
   to each library per month, smoothed (derived from git logs). Illustrates the
   convergence of a fractured community (around 2017) into a unified one (now).
   :label:`fig-github-histogram`

In 2018, HEP physicist and programmer Hans Dembinski proposed a histogram
library to the Boost libraries, the most influential C++ library collection;
many additions to the standard library are based on Boost. Boost.Histogram
provided a histogram-as-an-object concept from HEP, but was designed around 
C++14 templating, using composable axes and storage types. It originally had an initial

> Python binding, written in Boost::Python. Henry Schreiner proposed the creation

Reviewer: I think we should be explicit that this is one of the people writing this paper.

bindings were removed, Boost::Histogram was accepted into the Boost libraries,
and work began on boost-histogram. IRIS-HEP, a multi-institution
project for sustainable HEP software, had just started, which was providing
funding for several developers to work on Scikit-HEP project packages such as
this one. This project would pioneer standalone C++ library development and
deployment for Scikit-HEP.

There were already a variety of attempts at histogram libraries, but none of
them filled the requirements of HEP physicists: fills on pre-existing
histograms, simple manipulation of multidimensional histograms, competitive
performance, and easy to install in clusters or for students. Any new attempt
here would have to be clearly better than the existing collection of diverse
attempts (see Fig :ref:`fig-github-histogram`).  The development of a library
with compiled components intended to be usable everywhere required good support
for building libraries that was lacking both in Scikit-HEP and to an extent the
broader Python ecosystem.  Previous advancements in the packaging ecosystem,
such as the wheel format for distributing binary platform dependent Python

> packages and the manylinux specification and docker image had that allowed a

Reviewer: > and docker image had that allowed

I can't parse this -- what do you mean?

Author: The `had` shouldn't be there.

single compiled wheel to target many distributions of Linux, but there still

> were many challenges to making a library redistrubtable on all platforms.

Reviewer: > redistrubtable

not sure about the spelling on this one

> were many challenges to making a library redistrubtable on all platforms.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
were many challenges to making a library redistributable on all platforms.
```

Work here would eventually be merged into the existing and general cibuildwheel
package, which would become the build tool for all non-ROOT binary packages in
Scikit-HEP, as well as over 600 other packages like matplotlib and numpy, and
was accepted into the PyPA (Python Packaging Authority).

The second major development was the upstreaming of CI and build system
developments to pybind11. Pybind11 is a C++ API for Python designed for writing
a binding to C++, and provided significant benefits to our packages over
(mis)-using Cython for bindings; Cython was designed to transpile a Python-like
language to C (or C++), and just happened to support bindings since you can
call C and C++ from it, but it was not what it was designed for. Benefits
of pybind11 included reduced code complexity and duplication, no pre-process
step (cythonize), no need to pin NumPy when building, and a cross-package API.
The iMinuit package was later moved from Cython to pybind11 as well, and
pybind11 became the Scikit-HEP recommended binding tool. We
contributed a variety of fixes and features to pybind11, including positional-only

> and keyword-only arguments, the option to prepending to the overload chain, and an API

Reviewer: Option of prepending? Or option to prepend?

> and keyword-only arguments, the option to prepending to the overload chain, and an API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and keyword-only arguments, the option to prepend to the overload chain, and an API
```

modernize and improve all the example projects with simpler builds, new CI, and
cibuildwheel support.

This example of a project with binary components being usable everywhere then
encouraged the development of Awkward 1.0, a rewrite of AwkwardArray replacing
the Python-only code with compiled code using pybind11, fixing some
long-standing limitations, like an inability to slice past two dimensions or
select "n choose k" for :math:`k>5`; these simply could not be expressed using
Awkward 0's NumPy expressions, but can be solved with custom compiled kernels.
This also enabled further developments in backends :cite:`pivarski2020awkward`.

Broader ecosystem
-----------------

Scikit-HEP had become a "toolset" for HEP analysis in
Python, a collection of packages that worked together, instead of a "toolkit"
like ROOT, which is one monopackage that tries to provide everything
:cite:`Rodrigues:2020syo`.  A toolset is more natural in the Python ecosystem,
where we have good packaging tools and many existing libraries. Scikit-HEP only
needed to fill existing gaps, instead of covering every possible aspect of an

> analysis like ROOT did. The original scikit-hep package had it's

Reviewer: it's -> its

> analysis like ROOT did. The original scikit-hep package had it's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
analysis like ROOT did. The original scikit-hep package had its
```

> functionality was pulled out into existing or new separate packages like

Reviewer: _had its functionality was pulled_?

> functionality was pulled out into existing or new separate packages like

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
functionality pulled out into existing or new separate packages such as
```

HEPUnits and Vector, and the core scikit-hep package instead became a

> metapackage with no unique functionality on its own, but instead installs a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
metapackage with no unique functionality on its own. Instead, it installs a
```
